docs: Instrumentation Authors Guide (#946)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib: instrumentation/CONTRIBUTING.md

## Contributing a New Instrumentation Library

Our long-term goal is to provide instrumentation for all popular Ruby libraries. Ideally we would like to have first-party instrumentation for all libraries maintained by the Gem authors to ensure compatability with upstream gems, however in many cases this is not possible.

For this reason we welcome contributions of new instrumentation libraries that cannot be maintained by the original gem authors as first party instrumentations.

The following steps are required to contribute a new instrumentation library:

1. Generate an instrumentation gem skeleton
2. Implement the instrumentation library including comprehensive automated tests
3. Add the instrumentation library to the appropriate CI workflow
4. Include documentation for your instrumentation
    * Document all instrumentation-specific configuration options in the `README.md` and `yardoc` comments
    * Document all semantic conventions used by the instrumentation in the `README.md`
    * Provide executable examples in an `examples` directory
5. Submit a pull request

## Generate the Gem

This repository contains a script to generate a new instrumentation library.

> The snippit below demonstrates how to generate a an instrumentation for the `werewolf` gem, starting from the repository root.

Reviewer: Super minor:
```suggestion
The snippet below demonstrates how to generate a an instrumentation for the `werewolf` gem, starting from the repository root.
```

      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry-instrumentation-werewolf.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf/instrumentation.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf/version.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/test/test_helper.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/test/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf/instrumentation_test.rb
      insert  .toys/.data/releases.yml
      insert  instrumentation/all/Gemfile
      insert  instrumentation/all/opentelemetry-instrumentation-all.gemspec
      insert  instrumentation/all/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/all.rb

```

## Implementation guidelines

The original design and implementation of this project was heavily influenced by Datadog's `dd-trace-rb` project. You may refer to the [Datadog Porting Guide](datadog-porting-guide.md) as a reference for implementing instrumentations, however the following guidelines are specific to OpenTelemetry Ruby:

> *. Use `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`
> *. Use the OpenTelemetry API
> *. Use First Party Extension Points
> *. Use Semantic Conventions
> *. Write comprehensive automated tests
> *. Understand Performance Characteristics

Reviewer: These currently do not render as a list:
```suggestion
* Use `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`
* Use the OpenTelemetry API
* Use First Party Extension Points
* Use Semantic Conventions
* Write comprehensive automated tests
* Understand Performance Characteristics
```

### Use `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`

The entry point of your instrumentation should be implemented as a subclass of `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`:

* Implement `install` block, where all of the integration work happens

> * Implement `present` block

Reviewer: I think we need a very short description of what the `present` block expects, just like we did for `install` and `compatible`.

Author: Added some more details with a code example

* Implement `compatible` block and check for at least the minumum required gem version

### Use the OpenTelemetry API

Instrumentations are intended to be portable and usable with vendor distributions of the SDK. For this reason, you must use the OpenTelemetry API to create spans and add attributes, events, and links to spans and avoid using the OpenTelemetry SDK directly.

> Each instrumentation _must_ use a named tracer. Instrumentations that inherit from `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base` will get a single helper method that will automatically provide your instrumentation with a named tracer under `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::${Gem Name>}::Instrumentation.instance.tracer`.

Reviewer: Minor:
```suggestion
Each instrumentation _must_ use a named tracer. Instrumentations that inherit from `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base` will get a single helper method that will automatically provide your instrumentation with a named tracer under `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::${Gem Name}::Instrumentation.instance.tracer`.
```

When semantic conventions do not exist, use the [Elastic Common Schema](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/index.html) and submit a Issue/PR with your attributes to the [Semantic Conventions repo](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) to propose a new set of standard attributes.

If the attribute is specific to your instrumentation, then consider namespacing it using the `instrumentation` prefix e.g. `werewolf.bite.damage`.

### Write Comprehensive Automated Tests

Code that is not tested will not be accepted by maintainers. We understand that providing 100% test coverage is not always possible but we still ask that you provide your best effort when writing automated tests.

Most of the libraries we are instrumenting introduce changes that are outside of our control. For this reason integration or state based tests are preferred over interaction (mock) tests.

When you do in fact run into cases where test doubles or API stubs are absolutely necessary then we recommend using the `rspec-mocks` and `webmocks` gems.

### Understand Performance Characteristics

Instrumentation libraries should be as lightweight as possible

> * Avoid allocating too many objects and private methods

Reviewer: I think "private methods" should be listed as a separate bullet point, explaining why instrumenting private methods is less desirable.

Reviewer: Hmm, actually, because this section is called "Understand Performance Characteristics", what do "private methods" have to do with performance?

Author: I need to expand on this a lot!

We want to avoid allocating anything unnecessarily to the call stack, bust the call cache, require our users to add additional backtrace filters, or cause issues with yjit having to unravel code it optimized away as a result of something like an exception. 

I see your point though about private methods seeming to be unrelated and should probably get a section on its own. 

That also brings up another topic/concern with monkey patches and using private methods!

Author: I broke out using private methods into it's own section 

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/946/commits/7285a7d8226086503e23f1f6b0d14ed79b2d5628

          gem: "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.2"
      - name: "Test Ruby 3.1"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem:  "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.1"
      - name: "Test Ruby 3.0"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem:  "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.0"
          yard: true
          rubocop: true
          build: true
      - name: "Test JRuby"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem:  "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "jruby-9.4.2.0"
    services:
      # ...
      my_service:
        image: my_service:latest
        # ...
```

## Documentation

### README and Yardoc

The `instrumentation_generator` will create a `README.md` file for your instrumentation. Please ensure that the `README` is up-to-date and contains the following:

1. The span names, events, and semantic attributes that are emitted by the instrumentation
2. The configuration options that are available
3. Any known limitations or caveats
4. The minimum supported gem version

> In addition to that There should also be redundant `yardoc` comments in the entrypoint of your gem, i.e. the subclass `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`.

Reviewer: Minor:
```suggestion
In addition to that, there should also be redundant `yardoc` comments in the entrypoint of your gem, i.e. the subclass `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`.
```

> :information_source: See the `ActiveJob` instrumentation [`README`](./active_job/README.md) for a comprehensive example.

### Examples

Executuable examples should be included in the `examples` directory that demonstrate how to use the instrumentation in a real-world scenario.

> We recommend using Bundler's inline gemfile to run the examples. Here is an example from the `grape` instrumentation:

Reviewer: I suggest adding an external link to Bundler's documentation here:
```suggestion
We recommend using [Bundler's inline gemfile](https://bundler.io/guides/bundler_in_a_single_file_ruby_script.html) to run the examples. Here is an example from the `grape` instrumentation:
```

### Write Comprehensive Automated Tests

Code that is not tested will not be accepted by maintainers. We understand that providing 100% test coverage is not always possible but we still ask that you provide your best effort when writing automated tests.

Most of the libraries we are instrumenting introduce changes that are outside of our control. For this reason integration or state based tests are preferred over interaction (mock) tests.

When you do in fact run into cases where test doubles or API stubs are absolutely necessary then we recommend using the `rspec-mocks` and `webmocks` gems.

### Understand Performance Characteristics

Instrumentation libraries should be as lightweight as possible and must:

* Avoid allocating objects unless absolutely necessary
* Rely on `rubocop-performance` linters to catch performance issues
* Consider using [microbenchmarks](https://github.com/evanphx/benchmark-ips) and [profiling](https://ruby-prof.github.io/) to address any possible performance issues
* Provide minimal solutions and code paths

#### Minimal Solutions are Better

> Instrumentations should have both the minimal amount of code necessary to provide useful insights to our users.

Author: ```suggestion
Instrumentations should have the minimal amount of code necessary to provide useful insights to our users.
```

The following steps are required to contribute a new instrumentation library:

1. Generate an instrumentation gem skeleton
2. Implement the instrumentation library including comprehensive automated tests
3. Add the instrumentation library to the appropriate CI workflow
4. Include documentation for your instrumentation
    * Document all instrumentation-specific configuration options in the `README.md` and `yardoc` comments
    * Document all semantic conventions used by the instrumentation in the `README.md`
    * Provide executable examples in an `examples` directory
5. Submit a pull request

## Generate the Gem

This repository contains a script to generate a new instrumentation library.

The snippet below demonstrates how to generate a an instrumentation for the `werewolf` gem, starting from the repository root.

```console

$bash opentelemetry-ruby-contrib> bin/instrumentation_generator werewolf

```

The output of the generator shows that it creates a new directory in the `instrumentation` directory using the name of the gem:

``` console

🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨🚨

>  WARNING: Your gem will *NOT* be tested until you add it to the CI workflows in `.github/workflows/ci.yml`!!

Reviewer 2: We don't have a `ci.yml` file. Should this be updated to `.github/workflows/ci-instrumentation.yml`? 

We also put gems in `.github/dependabot.yml`. Should we call that out too? 

If you think script updates are outside the scope of this PR, I'm happy to make a follow-up issue to tackle these and anything else that comes up during the review.

Author: This is the output of the script. It is probably best to fix the script and then update this manual/guide.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. Here's the follow-up issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/issues/978 

You're right about mentioning the CI files. I hadn't gotten that far when I wrote this, but I think it  covers what's needed well.

      create  instrumentation/werewolf/Gemfile
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/LICENSE
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/opentelemetry-instrumentation-werewolf.gemspec
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/Rakefile
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/README.md
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry-instrumentation-werewolf.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf/instrumentation.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf/version.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/test/test_helper.rb
      create  instrumentation/werewolf/test/opentelemetry/instrumentation/werewolf/instrumentation_test.rb
      insert  .toys/.data/releases.yml
      insert  instrumentation/all/Gemfile
      insert  instrumentation/all/opentelemetry-instrumentation-all.gemspec
      insert  instrumentation/all/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/all.rb

```

## Implementation guidelines

> The original design and implementation of this project was heavily influenced by Datadog's `dd-trace-rb` project. You may refer to the [Datadog Porting Guide](datadog-porting-guide.md) as a reference for implementing instrumentations, however the following guidelines are specific to OpenTelemetry Ruby:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The original design and implementation of this project was heavily influenced by Datadog's `dd-trace-rb` project. You may refer to the [Datadog Porting Guide](datadog-porting-guide.md) as a reference for implementing instrumentations, however, the following guidelines are specific to OpenTelemetry Ruby:
```

> * Use `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`

Reviewer 2: Since this group of bullets matches the headings for the sections below, what do you think about adding anchor links?

Author: GitHub MD auto generates anchor links to a heading when you click it. Do you mean having sections use links to refer to each other?

Reviewer 2: That's right, I forgot the links were automatically generated! So it would be linking whatever the auto-generated value is for the heading to the bullet with the same heading: 

```markdown
* [Use `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`](#anchor-link-to-Use-OpenTelemetry-Instrumentation-Base-heading)
```

Author: I see. Treating that bulleted list more like a sub table of contents.

> * Use the OpenTelemetry API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use the OpenTelemetry API
```

Author: what is the difference between these two?

> * Use First Party Extension Points

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use first-party extension points
```

* Use Semantic Conventions
* Write comprehensive automated tests

> * Understand Performance Characteristics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Understand performance characteristics
```

### Use `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`

The entry point of your instrumentation should be implemented as a subclass of `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`:

> * Implement `install` block, where all of the integration work happens

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Implement an `install` block, where all of the integration work happens
```

> * Implement `present` block, which is you check if the library you are instrumenting was loaded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Implement a `present` block, which checks whether the library you are instrumenting was loaded
```

> * Implement `compatible` block and check for at least the minumum required library version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Implement a `compatible` block and check for at least the minimum required library version
  * OpenTelemetry Ruby Contrib generally supports only versions of gems that are within the maintenance window
```

I'm not sure if the sub-bullet I'm proposing is necessary, but wanted to throw it out there. Also I feel like there's a better phrase than "maintenance window" to convey what I'm trying to say here, but it escapes me.

Author: 💭 
> OpenTelemetry Ruby Contrib supports instrumenting versions of gems that are under active maintenance and receiving security updates

?

> * Any custom `options` you want to support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add any custom configuration `options` you want to support
```

The example below demonstrates how to implement the `Werewolf` instrumentation:

```ruby

# frozen_string_literal: true

# Copyright The OpenTelemetry Authors
#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

module OpenTelemetry
  module Instrumentation
    module Werewolf
      class Instrumentation < OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base
        MINIMUM_VERSION = Gem::Version.new('0.1.0')

        install do |_config|
          require_relative 'handlers'
          Handlers.subscribe
        end

        option :transformations, default: :omit, validate: %i[omit include]

        present do
          defined?(::Werewolf) && defined?(::ActiveSupport)
        end

        compatible do
          Gem::Version.new(::Wereworlf::VERSION) >= MINIMUM_VERSION

>         end

Reviewer 2: This order of these method calls is different than the order listed in the bullets above. Do we want them to match? Is there an order they most commonly appear in the instrumentation? 

Or, perhaps we update the generator script to include the order we recommend. Right now, it doesn't appear to include `option` or `compatible` blocks.

Author: It's probably best to update the script. It could generate commented out examples.

      end
    end
  end
end

```

* The `install` block lazily requires the instrumentation handlers, which subscribe to events published by the `Werewolf` event hooks.

> * The `present` block checks if the `Werewolf` and `ActiveSupport` libraries are loaded, which it will use to subscribe to events and generate spans. It will skip the installation if those dependencies were not loaded before the instrumentation was being initialized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `present` block checks if the `Werewolf` and `ActiveSupport` libraries are loaded, which it will use to subscribe to events and generate spans. It will skip the installation if those dependencies were not loaded before the instrumentation was initialized.
```

> * The `compatible` block checks if the `Werewolf` library version is at least `0.1.0` and will skip it if it is not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `compatible` block checks if the `Werewolf` library version is at least `0.1.0` and will skip installation if it is not.
```

> * The `options` section allows you to define custom options that can be passed to the instrumentation. In this example, the `transformations` option is defined with a default value of `:omit` and a validation rule that only allows `:omit` or `:include` values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `options` section allows you to define custom configuration options that can be passed to the instrumentation. In this example, the `transformations` option is defined with a default value of `:omit` and a validation rule that only allows `:omit` or `:include` values.
```

### Use the OpenTelemetry API

> Instrumentations are intended to be portable and usable with vendor distributions of the SDK. For this reason, you must use the OpenTelemetry API to create spans and add attributes, events, and links to spans and avoid using the OpenTelemetry SDK directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instrumentations are intended to be portable and usable with vendor distributions of the SDK. For this reason, you must use the [OpenTelemetry API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby/tree/main/api) to create spans and add attributes, events, and links to spans and avoid using the [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby/tree/main/sdk) directly.
```

Author: Generally speaking, I prefer using links with URLs in the footers over inline.

Each instrumentation _must_ use a named tracer. Instrumentations that inherit from `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base` will get a single helper method that will automatically provide your instrumentation with a named tracer under `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::${Gem Name}::Instrumentation.instance.tracer`.

> For example, the `Werewolf` generated in the example above instrumentation is available `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Werewolf::Instrumentation.instance.tracer`. You should reference this tracer in your code when creating spans like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the `Werewolf` module generated in the example above is available via `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Werewolf::Instrumentation.instance.tracer`. You should reference this tracer in your code when creating spans like this:
```

```ruby

  OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Werewolf::Instrumentation.instance.tracer.start_span('transform') do
    # code to be traced
  end

```

> :warning: This tracer is not _upgradable_ before the SDK is initialized, therefore it is important that your instrumentation _always_ use stack local references of the tracer.

> ### Use First Party Extension Points

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use first-party extension points
```

> Whenever possible, use first party extension points (hooks) to instrument libraries. This ensures that the instrumentation is compatible with the latest versions of the library and that the instrumentation is maintained by the library authors. `ActiveSupport::Notifications` and `Middleware` are good examples of a first party extension points that are used by our instrumentation libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever possible, use first-party extension points (hooks) to instrument libraries. This ensures that the instrumentation is compatible with the latest versions of the library and that the instrumentation is maintained by the library authors. [`ActiveSupport::Notifications`](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/active_support_instrumentation.html) and `Middleware` are good examples of first-party extension points used by our instrumentation libraries.
```

Is there a good example link for `Middleware` you can think of? This [Sidekiq](https://github.com/sidekiq/sidekiq/blob/main/docs/middleware.md) doc comes to mind, but I'm not sure if it's the best option.

> Monkey patching is discouraged in OpenTelemetry Ruby because it is the most common source of bugs and incompatability with the libraries we are instrumenting. If you must monkey patch, please ensure that the monkey patch is as isolated as possible and that it is clearly documented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Monkey patching is discouraged in OpenTelemetry Ruby because it is the most common source of bugs and incompatability with the libraries we instrument. If you must monkey patch, please ensure that the monkey patch is as isolated as possible and that it is clearly documented.
```

### Use Semantic Conventions

> Use the OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions to ensure that the instrumentation is compatible with other OpenTelemetry libraries and that the data is useful in a distributed context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/semantic-conventions/) to ensure the instrumentation is compatible with other OpenTelemetry libraries and that the data is useful in a distributed context.
```

> :information_source: Privacy and security are important considerations when adding attributes to spans. Please ensure that you are not adding sensitive information to spans. If you are unsure, please ask for a review.

> When semantic conventions do not exist, use the [Elastic Common Schema](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/index.html) and submit a Issue/PR with your attributes to the [Semantic Conventions repo](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) to propose a new set of standard attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When semantic conventions do not exist, use the [Elastic Common Schema](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/index.html) and submit an Issue/PR with your attributes to the [Semantic Conventions repo](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) to propose a new set of standard attributes.
```

> If the attribute is specific to your instrumentation, then consider namespacing it using the `instrumentation` prefix e.g. `werewolf.bite.damage`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the attribute is specific to your instrumentation, then consider namespacing it using the `instrumentation` prefix e.g. `werewolf.bite.damage` and calling it out in the instrumentation README.
```

> ### Write Comprehensive Automated Tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Write comprehensive automated tests
```

Code that is not tested will not be accepted by maintainers. We understand that providing 100% test coverage is not always possible but we still ask that you provide your best effort when writing automated tests.

> Most of the libraries we are instrumenting introduce changes that are outside of our control. For this reason integration or state based tests are preferred over interaction (mock) tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the libraries instrument introduce changes outside of our control. For this reason, integration or state-based tests are preferred over interaction (mock) tests.
```

> When you do in fact run into cases where test doubles or API stubs are absolutely necessary then we recommend using the `rspec-mocks` and `webmocks` gems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you do in fact run into cases where test doubles or API stubs are absolutely necessary, we recommend using the [`rspec-mocks`](https://github.com/rspec/rspec-mocks) and [`webmocks`](https://github.com/bblimke/webmock) gems.
```

> ### Understand Performance Characteristics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Understand performance characteristics
```

> The OTel Specification describes expectations around the performance of SDKs, which you must review and apply to instrumentations: <https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/performance/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OTel Specification describes expectations around the performance of SDKs, which you must review and apply to instrumentation: <https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/performance/>
```

Instrumentation libraries should be as lightweight as possible and must:

* Rely on `rubocop-performance` linters to catch performance issues
* Consider using [microbenchmarks](https://github.com/evanphx/benchmark-ips) and [profiling](https://ruby-prof.github.io/) to address any possible performance issues
* Provide minimal solutions and code paths

#### Provide minimal solutions and code paths

> Instrumentations should have the minimal amount of code necessary to provide useful insights to our users. It may sound contrary to good engineering practices, but you must avoid adding lots of small methods, classes, and objects when instrumenting a library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instrumentation should have the minimal amount of code necessary to provide useful insights to our users. It may sound contrary to good engineering practices, but you must avoid adding lots of small methods, classes, and objects when instrumenting a library.
```

> Though often easier to maintain and reason about; small and well factored code adds overhead to the library you are instrumenting resulting in performance degradation due to unnecessary object allocations, method dispatching, and other performance overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Though often easier to maintain and reason about; small and well-factored code adds overhead to the library you're instrumenting, resulting in performance degradation due to unnecessary object allocations, method dispatching, and other performance overhead.
```

> It will also contribute to building large backtraces that makes it more difficult for our end users to understand the essential parts of exception reports application. That will in turn likely result in additional filtering logic in the their application to avoid reporting unnecessary stack frames.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also contributes to building large backtraces, making it more difficult for our end users to understand the essential parts of exception reports. That will likely result in additional filtering logic in their application to avoid reporting unnecessary stack frames.
```

> In cases when code uses monkey patching, it runs the risk of _adding_ methods that conflict with the internal implementatation of the library and may result in unexpected behavior and bugs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In cases when code uses monkey patching, it runs the risk of _adding_ methods that conflict with the internal implementation of the library and may result in unexpected behavior and bugs.
```

> Avoid instrumenting _every_ method in a library and instead focus on the methods the provide the _most_ insights into what typically causes performance problems for applications, e.g. I/O and network calls. The use case for this type of low level granularity fails under the purview of profiling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Avoid instrumenting _every_ method in a library and instead focus on the methods that provide the _most_ insights into what typically causes performance problems for applications, e.g. I/O and network calls. The use case for this type of low-level granularity falls under the purview of profiling.
```

In the near future, [OTel Profiling](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/profiling/) will provide users an even deeper understanding of what is happening in their applications at a more granular level.

Here are some examples of performance fixes that reduced object allocations and method dispatching:

* <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/867>
* <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/723>
* <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/665>
* <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/642>
* <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/207>

> * <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ruby-contrib/pull/232>

Reviewer 2: 💚

> #### Avoid Adding Custom Extensions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Avoid adding custom extensions
```

Though your instrumentation may accept configurations options to customize the output, you should consider that the more options you add, the more complexity you will have to manage.

> You should _avoid_ adding options that allow custom code blocks to be executed as part of the instrumentation. It is often difficult to predict error modes and the performance impact custom code will have on your instrumentation, which in turn will impact the service being instrumented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should _avoid_ adding options that allow custom code blocks (`type: :callable`) to be executed as part of the instrumentation. It is often difficult to predict error modes and the performance impact custom code will have on your instrumentation, which in turn will impact the service being instrumented.
```

Author: Now that I am reading this again, I think it's best to change the language and say `You must` as opposed to `You should`

> You should steer users towards post processing as part of the OTel Collector, which has a richer and more powerful toolset, and execute out of the application critical code path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should steer users towards post-processing as part of the [OTel Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/), which has a richer and more powerful toolset, and executes out of the application's critical code path.
```

## Enable CI

> This project contains multiple CI workflows that execute tests and ensures the gems are installable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This project contains multiple CI workflows that execute tests and ensure the gems are installable.
```

> ### Standalone Instrumentations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Standalone instrumentation
```

> For standalone instrumentations that do not have any external service dependencies, add the gem to the `/.github/workflows/ci-instrumentation.yml` file under `jobs/instrumentation/strategy/matrix/gem`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For standalone instrumentation that does not have any external service dependencies, add the gem to the `/.github/workflows/ci-instrumentation.yml` file under `jobs/instrumentation/strategy/matrix/gem`:
```

``` yaml

jobs:
  instrumentation:
    strategy:
      fail-fast: false
      matrix:
        gem:
          - action_pack
          - action_view
          - active_job
          # ...
          - werewolf
        os:
          - ubuntu-latest

```

#### JRuby Compatibility

> If your gem is incompatible with `JRuby`you can exclude them from the matrix by adding an entry to the `/.github/workflows/ci-instrumentation.yml` file under `jobs/instrumentation/steps/[name="JRuby Filter"]`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your gem is incompatible with `JRuby`, you can exclude it from the matrix by adding an entry to the `/.github/workflows/ci-instrumentation.yml` file under `jobs/instrumentation/steps/[name="JRuby Filter"]`:
```

``` yaml
      - name: "JRuby Filter"
        id: jruby_skip
        shell: bash
        run: |
          echo "skip=false" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
          [[ "${{ matrix.gem }}" == "action_pack"              ]] && echo "skip=true" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
          # ...
          [[ "${{ matrix.gem }}" == "werewolf"                     ]] && echo "skip=true" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
          # This is essentially a bash script getting evaluated, so we need to return true or the whole job fails.
          true
```

> ### External Service Instrumentations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### External service instrumentations
```

> Adding jobs for instrumentations that have external service dependencies may be a bit more difficult if the job does not already have a similar service configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding jobs for instrumentation with external service dependencies may be a bit more difficult if the job does not already have a similar service configured.
```

#### Using Existing Services

CI is currently configured to support the following services:

* kafka
* memcached
* mongodb
* mysql
* postgresql
* rabbitmq
* redis

> If your gem depends on one of those services then great! The next step is to at the gem to matrix in the `/.github/workflows/ci-service-instrumentation.yml` file under `jobs/instrumentation_*/strategy/matrix/gem`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your gem depends on one of those services, then great! The next step is to add the gem to matrix in the `/.github/workflows/ci-service-instrumentation.yml` file under `jobs/instrumentation_*/strategy/matrix/gem`:
```

    runs-on: ${{ matrix.os }}
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - name: "Test Ruby 3.3"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem: "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.3"
      - name: "Test Ruby 3.2"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem: "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.2"
      - name: "Test Ruby 3.1"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem:  "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.1"
      - name: "Test Ruby 3.0"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem:  "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "3.0"
          yard: true
          rubocop: true
          build: true
      - name: "Test JRuby"
        uses: ./.github/actions/test_gem
        with:
          gem:  "opentelemetry-instrumentation-${{ matrix.gem }}"
          ruby: "jruby-9.4.2.0"
    services:
      # ...
      my_service:
        image: my_service:latest
        # ...
```

## Documentation

### README and Yardoc

> The `instrumentation_generator` will create a `README.md` file for your instrumentation. Please ensure that the `README` is up-to-date and contains the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `instrumentation_generator` creates a `README.md` file for your instrumentation. Please ensure that the `README` is up-to-date and contains the following:
```

> 1. The span names, events, and semantic attributes that are emitted by the instrumentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The span names, events, and semantic attributes emitted by the instrumentation
```

> 2. The configuration options that are available

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The configuration options available
```

3. Any known limitations or caveats
4. The minimum supported gem version

> In addition to that, there should also be redundant `yardoc` comments in the entrypoint of your gem, i.e. the subclass `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`.
> 
> > :information_source: See the `ActiveJob` instrumentation [`README`](./active_job/README.md) for a comprehensive example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> :information_source: See the `ActiveJob` instrumentation [`README`](./active_job/README.md) for a comprehensive example.

In addition to that, there should also be redundant `yardoc` comments in the entrypoint of your gem, i.e. the subclass `OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Base`.

> :information_source: See the `Sidekiq::Instrumentation` [class description](./sidekiq/lib/opentelemetry/instrumentation/sidekiq/instrumentation.rb) for a comprehensive example. 
```

  c.service_name = 'trace_demonstration'
  c.use_all # this will only require instrumentation gems it finds that are installed by bundler.
end

at_exit do
  OpenTelemetry.tracer_provider.shutdown
end

# A basic Grape API example
class ExampleAPI < Grape::API
  format :json

  desc 'Return a greeting message'
  get :hello do
    { message: 'Hello, world!' }
  end

  desc 'Return information about a user'
  params do
    requires :id, type: Integer, desc: 'User ID'
  end
  get 'users/:id' do
    { id: params[:id], name: 'John Doe', email: 'johndoe@example.com' }
  end
end

# Set up fake Rack application
builder = Rack::Builder.app do
  # Integration is automatic in web frameworks but plain Rack applications require this line.
  # Enable it in your config.ru.
  use *OpenTelemetry::Instrumentation::Rack::Instrumentation.instance.middleware_args
  run ExampleAPI
end
app = Rack::MockRequest.new(builder)

app.get('/hello')
app.get('/users/1')

```

## Submit a pull request

You are encouraged to submit a `draft` pull request early in the development process to get feedback from the maintainers, run your tests via CI, and ensure that your changes are in line with the project's goals.

> The `CODEOWNERS` is used to notify the instrumentation authors a pull request is opened. Please add yourself to the `instrumentation` section of the `CODEOWNERS` file, e.g.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CODEOWNERS` is used to notify instrumentation authors when a pull request is opened. Please add yourself to the `instrumentation` section of the `CODEOWNERS` file, e.g.
```

### Understand Performance Characteristics

Instrumentation libraries should be as lightweight as possible and must:

> * Avoid allocating objects unless absolutely necessary

Reviewer: Maybe it's just my personal opinion, but when I read "unless absolutely necessary", I will compromise everything else (including code legibility and possibly maintainability) in order to achieve the reduction in object allocation.

I have *a* suggestion, which may not be perfect, but it kind of captures how I think it would make sense to convey this advice (but please feel free to change it):
```suggestion
* Only allocate objects are necessary
```

* Provide minimal solutions and code paths

#### Minimal Solutions are Better

Instrumentations should have both the minimal amount of code necessary to provide useful insights to our users.

It may sound contrary to good engineering practices, but you should avoid adding lots of small methods, classes, and objects to handle your use cases.

Adding lots of small well factored code adds some overhead to the library we are instrumenting. It may result in unnecessary allocations, method dispatching, and other performance overhead. It will end up contributing to building large backtraces and making it harder to understand what is happening in the application, which will likely result in additional filtering logic.

In cases when code uses monkey patching, it runs the risk of _adding_ methods that conflict with the internal implementatation of the library and may result in unexpected behavior and bugs.

Avoid instrumenting every method in a library, instead focus on the methods the provide the _most_ insights into what typically causes performance problems for applications, e.g. I/O and network calls.

> Hopefully in the near future, we will be able to provide [OTel Profiling](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/profiling/) to help users gain an even deeper understanding of what is happening in their applications at a more granular level.

Reviewer: The language is a bit too noncommittal, in my opinion.

Not sure if my suggestion here the best way to word it, but it captures my sentiment on how the sentence should convey the information:
```suggestion
In the near future, [OTel Profiling](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/profiling/) will provide users an even deeper understanding of what is happening in their applications at a more granular level.
```

Author: Fair as the SIG is still experimenting with profiling.

> #### Avoid Adding Custom Extensions (E_TOOMANYOPTIONS)

Reviewer: What is `E_TOOMANYOPTIONS`?

Author: A bit of tongue in cheek... as in "Having to many configuration options will lead to an error at some point". I can remove it if the joke is not landing.

Author: ```suggestion
#### Avoid Adding Custom Extensions
```
